# Notes on Extending the `zaminf` package

## 2026-04-10: Initial Exploration

- Interesting sentence at the end of the introduction of Broderick et al (2020): "We do not yet recommend any specific alterations to common inferential procedures based on our metric, but we believe this direction is promising for future research." My idea about "betproofness" seems like a useful step in this direction. More broadly, trying to understand *where non-robustness actually comes frmo in practice* seems valuable. This means both determining which estimators are more likely to yield results that are sensitive to data-deletion *and* what kinds of observations / data patterns are responsible for non-robustness. 
- **Background from Broderick et al**
    - **Maximum Influence Perturbation (MIP)**: largest change induced in the quantity of interest by dropping no more than $100\alpha\%$ of the data.
    - **Most Influential Set (AMIS)**: the set that achieves the Maximum Influence Perturbation
    - **Perturbation-Inducing Proportion**: the minimum data proportion $\alpha \in [0,1]$ required to achieve a change of some size $\Delta$ in the quantity of interest. Report `NA` if no such $\alpha$ exists.
    - **Note**: here "change" means either change in an estimator's sign, its significance, or both. We may be interested in more general definitions, e.g. a confidence interval that shifts by a large fraction of the original interval's width or perhaps a large change in the width of a CI itself from data deletion.
    - **Z-estimator**: solution to $\sum_{n=1}^N G(\hat{\theta}(w),d_n) = O_P$ where $G$ is twice continuously differntiable.
    - **Weighted Estimating Equation**: $\hat{\theta}(w)$ solves $\sum_{n=1}^N w_n G(\theta,d_n) = 0_P$. Setting all the weights to one gives the original estimator. The set $W_\alpha$ consists of all weight vectors such that no more that $\lfloor \alpha N\rfloor$ elements are zero and the rest are one.
    - **Quantity of Interest**: a twice differentiable mapping $\phi\colon \mathbb{R}^P \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ that takes the full parameter $\theta$ and returns the scalar whose robustness we hope to determine. E.g. extracts a particular coefficient from a vector of parameters. Extending this to allow weights: $\phi(\theta, w)$. When the second argument is surpressed, this implies weights of one on each observation. Note that $\phi$ is assumed continuously differentiable in *both* arguments.
    - **The Key Idea**: Treat $\phi$ as a function of $w$ *only*, namely $w\mapsto \phi(\hat{\theta}(w), w)$ and Taylor expand around $\mathb{1} = (1, \cdots, 1)$, defining $\hat{\phi} = \phi(\hat{\theta}(\mathbf{1}),\mathbf{1})$, i.e.\ the original full-data quantity of interest. The approximation to $\phi$ evaluated at an artibrary set of weights is thus $\hat{\phi} + \sum_{n=1}^N (w_n - 1) \psi_n$ where $\psi_n$ is the partial derivative of $\phi$ with respect to $w_n$ evaluated at $w = \mathbb{1}$. Notice that the weights only enter this formula through $(w_n - 1)$. This is the key insight
    - **Approximate Maximal Influence Perturbation (AMIP)**: Remember that our idea was to *drop* a small number of observations. Because the sum of the weights doesn't matter for the weighted Z-estimator (the RHS is zero so we are free to re-scale), we can view dropping observations as setting their weights to zero while leaving all the other weights set equal to one. To make the notation simpler, let $\hat{\phi}^\text{drop}$ denote the quantity of interest after dropping some (unspecified) observations by setting their weights to zero. Then the Taylor approximation becomes $\hat{\phi}^\text{drop} - \hat{\phi} \approx \sum_{n=1}^N -\mathbf{1}\left\{\text{Observation } n \text{ is dropped} \} \cdot \psi_n$. Thus, to find the observations that cause the biggest *increase* in our target parameter when they are dropped, it sufficies to find the *most negative* values of $\psi_n$. (Notice the minus sign in front.) Conversely, to find the observations that cause the biggest *decrease*, it suffices to find the *most positive* values of $\psi_n$. That's all there is to it! Provided we can compute the required derivatives $\psi_n$, we can approximate the MIP and MIS defined above. 
- Under the hood, `zaminf` relies on the [`torch`](https://torch.mlverse.org/docs/) R package. More details of the package are available in [this book](https://skeydan.github.io/Deep-Learning-and-Scientific-Computing-with-R-torch/). In short, `torch` brings the functionality of PyTorch to R. It has no Python dependences: `torch` is written in R, C++ and C.
- I was worried that `torch` might not provide GPU acceleration on Mac, but in fact it has an [MPS backend](https://developer.apple.com/metal/pytorch/): `library(torch); backends_mps_is_available()`. 
- In `./zaminfluence/inst` there is a `.lyx` file and generated `.pdf` with (partial) derivations of the required derivatives the case of OLS/IV. The derivations are complete for "classical" standard errors but they kind of trail off at the end for the case of "grouped" (presumably this means clustered?) standard errors: "Looking at it this way I'm not sure how you could avoid either a for loop over the entries of $\hat{\beta}$ or construction of higher dimensional arrays". That seems right to me, given that some variants of clustered standard errors do require a loop. But if we want to implement torch-free calculations for our leading examples, this seems possible and someone else has already done the math for us! We need to check it, however, and we would then need to check the results against those of `torch`. 
- `zaminf` seems relatively straightforward to extend, provided that one understands the way that the package relies on `S3` classes. I'm a little rusty on these, so it's worth reviewing [Hadley's book](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/s3.html)
- `./zaminfluence/R/README.md` provides key details on how the code in `zaminfluence` is organized. At the bottom is a section called "Extending `zaminfluence`" but this seems to be out-of-date. I think part of this is correct: all you need to do is "provide your own instances of `ModelFit` and `ModelGrads` classes, as instantiated by the corresponding S3 functions `ModelGrads` and `ModelFit`". The sentence that follows, however seems to be out of date. It recommends using Python for automatic differentiation, called in R via `reticulate`, but this is *not* how the `zaminfluence` package itself actually works. Scattered throughout the package there seem to be traces of this older approach, but as far as I can tell none of it is actually used. We should probably clean out the cruft in our version of the package. 
- Names of functions throughout the package are somewhat misleading. Many of them include the word "Regressor" or "Regression" in their name despite being fully general and applicable to any Z-estimator. It seems useful to do some cleanup of function names to clarify what is specific to OLS / IV and what isn't. 
- The place where `torch` is actually used is to calculate the derivatives of the (weighted) score function: $\sum_{n=1}^N w_n G(\theta,d_n)=0$. As shown in Section 2.2.2 of the paper, these are the derivatives that are needed to compute $\psi_n$. (This follows from the implicit function theorem.) For MLE, the estimating equation is just the score. So for logit we have $\sum_{n=1}^N w_n x_n [y_n - \Lambda(x_n'\beta)]=0$ where $\Lambda$ is the is the standard logistic CDF.
